docs/_docs/contributing/setting-up-your-ide.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: Setting up your IDE
---

You can use either Metals with your favorite editor or
[IntelliJ IDEA for Scala](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/discover-intellij-idea-for-scala.html)
to work on the Scala 3 codebase. There are however a few additional
considerations to take into account.

## Bootstrapping Projects

The sbt build for dotty implements bootstrapping within the same build, so each
component has two projects:

```
sbt:scala3> projects
...
[info] 	   scala3-compiler
[info] 	   scala3-compiler-bootstrapped
...
```

These duplicated projects can be confusing and cause issues in IDEs, so it's
import to import the project in a specific way depending on your editor.

### Metals

When using Metals, the `-bootstrapped` projects are not exported by default.
Normally this is fine, but if you're working on certain modules like `scaladoc`
you'll actually want these modules exported. In order to achieve this you'll
want to make sure you do two things:

1. You'll want to find and change the following above
   `commonBootstrappedSettings` which is found in the
   [`Build.scala`](https://github.com/scala/scala3/blob/main/project/Build.scala)
   file.

```diff

-    val enableBspAllProjects = false,
+    val enableBspAllProjects = true,
```

2. Run `sbt publishLocal` to get the needed presentation compiler jars.

By default Metals uses Bloop build server, however you can also use sbt
directly. You can achieve this with the `Metals: Switch Build Server` command
and then choosing sbt. In VSCode, this looks like this:

![bsp-switch](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/777748/241986423-0724ae74-0ebd-42ef-a1b7-4d17678992b4.png)

### IntelliJ

In IntelliJ IDEA, we recommend importing the dotty codebase through BSP, then
the `-bootstrapped` projects are not exported.

Commit message:

Update getting started docs. (#22905)
Getting started now includes correct commands used to setup working on
bootstrapped projects

docs/_docs/contributing/setting-up-your-ide.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: Setting up your IDE
---

You can use either Metals with your favorite editor or
[IntelliJ IDEA for Scala](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/discover-intellij-idea-for-scala.html)
to work on the Scala 3 codebase. There are however a few additional
considerations to take into account.

## Bootstrapping Projects

The sbt build for dotty implements bootstrapping within the same build, so each
component has two projects:

```
sbt:scala3> projects
...
[info] 	   scala3-compiler
[info] 	   scala3-compiler-bootstrapped
...
```

These duplicated projects can be confusing and cause issues in IDEs, so it's
import to import the project in a specific way depending on your editor.

### Metals

When using Metals, the `-bootstrapped` projects are not exported by default.
Normally this is fine, but if you're working on certain modules like `scaladoc`
you'll actually want these modules exported. In order to achieve this you'll
want to make sure you do two things:

1. You'll want to find and change the following above
   `commonBootstrappedSettings` which is found in the
   [`Build.scala`](https://github.com/scala/scala3/blob/main/project/Build.scala)
   file.

```diff

-    val enableBspAllProjects = false,
+    val enableBspAllProjects = true,
```

2. Run in sbt shell `sbt> scala3-bootstrapped/compile` and then `sbt> scala3-bootstrapped/publishLocalBin`
   to get the required presentation compiler jars.

   If any step fails due to random errors, try removing `./out/` directory and running `sbt> clean`

   This step has to be repeated every time compiler version has been bumped.




By default Metals uses Bloop build server, however you can also use sbt
directly. You can achieve this with the `Metals: Switch Build Server` command
and then choosing sbt. In VSCode, this looks like this:

![bsp-switch](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/777748/241986423-0724ae74-0ebd-42ef-a1b7-4d17678992b4.png)

### IntelliJ

In IntelliJ IDEA, we recommend importing the dotty codebase through BSP, then
the `-bootstrapped` projects are not exported.
