# Inline Traits

## Motivation
Inline traits is a new attempt to solve the specialization problem for the JVM in a more convenient way than the `@specialized` annotation
from Scala 2 (the main problem of this being code bloat due to generating all possible specializations at declaration time of the specialized
class). Inline traits work alongside  `Specialized` traits, the latter being detailed in an accompanying document. 

The problem is as follows: due to the JVM's lack of support for generics, generic type parameters are erased by the compiler:
```scala
class A[T](val x: T)

class C:
    val w1 = A[Int](1)
    val w2 = A[Int](2)
    val w3 = A[Int](w1.x + w2.x)
```
is converted to:
```scala
class A:
    val x: Object
class C() extends Object() {
    def w1(): A = new A(Int.box(1))
    def w2(): A = new A(Int.box(2))
    def w3(): A = new A(Int.box(Int.unbox(this.w1().x()).+(Int.unbox(this.w2().x()))))
}
```
Thus type `T` is converted to `Object`, and so every use of `A[Int]()` must first build an `Object` containing the `Int` we want to pass (*boxing*),
in order to be able to call `A(x: Object)`. There is no `A(x: int)`. When referencing `x`  on an `A` we get an `Object` back, which we have to *unbox*
(extract from the wrapping `Object`).

This object creation and deletion is very slow. We desire a way to avoid this by generating specialized instances of classes which
use primitive types instead of `Object`. These can be used in situations where the (un)boxing overhead is likely to be high.

## Solution
An inline trait is defined just like a normal trait, but with an `inline` modifier.

Inline traits may be freely extended by objects, classes or other inline traits. An inline trait may also be extended by an ordinary trait, but only if the inline trait does not take parameters [***].

The following is an example of the use of an `inline trait`.

```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T):
    def foo: T = x

class B extends A[Int](1)
```
Let the term *inline trait* refer to traits such as `A` above, and let *inline receiver* refer to class-likes 
we inline into, such as `B` above.

When an inline trait is inherited by an object, class or another inline trait, all its contents are inlined, and adapted
to the context of the inline receiver. In particular this means that:
- references to type parameters of the inline trait  are specialized to the type arguments provided during extension
- `this` calls are updated to refer to the inline receiver.

Inline traits are themselves translated to pure interfaces. However their bodies are of course retained in TASTy files; this
enables us to inline them into inline receivers that exist in different compilation units (for example when an inline recevier
in user code extends an inline trait from a library).

The example above generates:
```scala
// Inline trait converted to pure interface
inline trait A[T](x: T):
    val x: T
    def foo: T

// Inline receiver class now contains inlined body
// with references to T specialized to Int.
// this.x refers to B.x
class B extends A[Int](1):
    override val x: Int = 1
    override def foo: Int = this.x
```

With multiple inline traits:

```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T):
    def foo: T = x

inline trait B extends A[Int]
class C extends B, A[Int](1)
```

```scala
inline trait A[T](x: T):
    val x: T
    def foo: T

inline trait B extends A[Int]:
    override def x: Int
    override def foo: Int

class C extends B, A[Int](1):
    override def x = 1
    override def foo = x
```
[!] This may be surprising compared to inline methods, as calls to inline methods from other inline methods are only inlined
when the outer inline method is inlined. While it is not immediately obvious why permitting inline traits to be inlined into other inline traits is useful (we could simply
inline everything into the first receiver which is not inline in the hierarchy), it becomes advantageous when we bring in the `Specialized` annotation; see the accompanying document.


Of course, patterns creating cycles of inlining are banned:

```scala
inline trait C[S]:
   def v(x: S): S = x
   def w: Unit = 
      val x = new D[S] {}
      println("w")

inline trait D[S]:
   def v(x: S): S = x
   def w: Unit = 
      val x = new C[S] {}
      println("w")

val x = new D[Char]() {}
```
Because of the pruning it's possible to define these circular inline traits. An error only occurs when they are inlined into `x` which creates a cycle. 

## Other Behaviours of Inline Traits
### Member reference replacement
References to members of inline traits accessed on inline receivers point to the inlined version, to ensure we avoid unnecessary boxing: [1]
```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T):
    def foo#1: T

class B extends A[Int](1)
    def foo#2: T = x // generated by inlining from foo#1

def fun(x: B) = 
    x.foo // points to foo#2 
```
### Private members
Inline traits may define private members, and these are handled specially: [2]
    - Private fields in the inline trait are inlined as private fields with a mangled name in the inline receiver. This ensures they do not collide with privates inherited from other inline traits.
    - The private fields are then no longer accessible in the inline trait, as it is transformed into a pure interface, so we delete them.

```scala
inline trait A(b: Boolean):
    private val x: Int = 1
    def foo(): Int = if b then x + 1 else 0

class B extends A(true)
```
Is converted to:

```scala
inline trait A(b: Boolean):
    def foo(): Int

class B extends A(true):
    private val A$$b: Boolean = true
    private val A$$x: Int = 1
    override def foo(): Int = if this.A$$b then this.A$$x.+(1) else 0
```

### Mixing in of multiple inline traits & super calls
An inline receiver may mix in multiple inline traits with colliding member names. This follows the same rules as normal traits. In particular, this must usually be disambiguated with an override. 
```scala
inline trait A:
    def foo = "Hello World"

inline trait B:
    def foo = "Bonjour"

class C extends A, B // error: C inherits conflicting members A.foo and B.foo
```
A typical way to disambiguate would be using `super`. For example:
```scala
class C extends A, B:
    override def foo = super[A].foo 
```
This syntax is supported for inline traits. Note however that as inline traits are converted to pure interfaces it is not possible to make a direct call to the
method on A or B. Furthermore if we allowed this, specialization would be lost. Therefore, overridden methods are inlined into the inline receiver with a mangled name,
e.g. `A$$foo`, `B$$foo` and the `override def foo` in `C` will delegate to one of these methods. Super calls to non-overridden methods are also supported.
These are transformed to point directly to the corresponding inlined methods with no need for name mangling.

However, inline traits may not contain `super` references to classes or non-inline traits. This is because `super` references in scala may only reference
direct parents, and, after inlining, those references that were to direct parents in the original inline traits would now have to point to ancestor classes which are further than 1 hop away. We cannot call into the inline trait and have the inline trait call the grandparent because the method in the inline trait will be abstract after pruning.

### Interaction with other types of inline
- Inline traits may define inline members (e.g. `inline def`, `inline val`). References to these are inlined as the body of the trait is inlined into the inline receiver, but the members themselves are not inlined and are deleted from the parent trait. E.g.:
    ```scala
    inline trait A:
        inline val x = 1

    class B extends A:
        def f = x
    ```
    becomes:
    ```scala
    inline trait A
    class B extends A:
        def f = 1
    ```
- As is usual, `inline val`s must have constant value types. In particular this means that they may not take the value of a parameter to the inline trait, even though these will be known at inlining time:
    ```scala
    inline trait A[T](x: T):
        inline val y = 1
        inline val a = y // ok
        inline val z = x // Not ok
    ```

### Name clashes in inlining
There is the potential for name clashes between members / parameters of inline traits and parameters / members of inline receivers. These are handled in the following way:

| Inline Trait Member Type              | Inline Receiver Member Type                  | Behaviour       | Justification                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Same as `trait` |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| `val` / `var` incl. `val`/`var` param | `val` / `var` incl. `val` / `var` param      | Needs `override`| Ensures behaviour matches that of normal traits. However note that normal traits will warn if we try to override a val parameter. This warning is turned off for inline traits, otherwise every inline trait with a val parameter would warn after inlining.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |   ✅         |
| `val` / `var` incl. `val`/`var` param | Primary constructor (local) param            | Not allowed     | We cannot rename the constructor param because users may specify it by name when constructing the class, and we can't have a conflict with the generated parameter accessor, yet the parameter accessor and parameter must have the same name, so we end up with a conflict between the inlined val/var param and the constructor param. Therefore we have to ban this.                                          | ❌                |
| `val` / `var` incl. `val`/`var` param | Method                                       | Not allowed     | As normal traits, without `override` will be told "needs override"; with `override` will be told "not a stable immutable value"                                                                                        | ✅              |
| Primary ctor (local) param            | `val` / `var` incl. `val` / `var` param      | Allowed         | We need to inline the generated parameter accessors into the receiver, but these are renamed (prefixed with the inline trait name) when doing so, therefore fine. This does not affect the name in the original trait. | ✅              |
| Primary ctor (local) param            | Primary constructor (local) param            | Allowed         | We need to inline the generated parameter accessors into the receiver, but these are renamed (prefixed with the inline trait name) when doing so, therefore fine. This does not affect the name in the original trait. | ✅               |
| Primary ctor (local) param            | Method                                       | Allowed         | We need to inline the generated parameter accessors into the receiver, but these are renamed (prefixed with the inline trait name) when doing so, therefore fine. This does not affect the name in the original trait. | ✅               |
| Method                                | `val` / `var` incl. `val` / `var` param      | Requires `override`                | | ✅ |
| Method                                | Primary constructor (local) param            | Allowed unless sig match  | We have the same issue as with  `val`/`var` params if the signature matches, so we need to ban it. Otherwise we allow it as in `trait`. | ❌ |
| Method                                | Method                                       | Requires `override`                | | ✅ |
| Type                                  | Type                                         | Allowed            | Usual rules apply | ✅ |


### Access to parent members
Inline receivers may not access the parameters of their parents (these are private):
```scala
inline trait A(x: Int)

class C extends A(10):
  val y = x // error: Not Found Error
```

## How do inline traits solve the problem?
We can now do the following with no boxing and unboxing:
```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T)
class IntA(x: Int) extends A[Int](x)

class C:
    val w1 = IntA(1)
    val w2 = IntA(2)
    val w3 = IntA(w1.x + w2.x)
```

Inline trait expansions are only generated on demand when a class or object extends an inline trait. This avoids the up-front cost and code explosion due to creating specialized copies which might never be needed.

From the original inline traits specification:
> Inline traits avoid all of the pain points of Scala 2 specialization. They can do more than primitive specialization since they also specialize on value parameters and reference types. This helps avoid megamorphic dispatch. Inline traits also profit from all the optimizations available for inline methods, including inline matches, summonFrom, embedded splices. Indeed the analogy of inline traits and inline methods is strong: inline calls correspond to supercalls in extending classes and objects, inline parameters are inline parameters of the trait, inline traits can have nested inline matches, etc.


## Shortcoming of inline traits
Compared to full specialization, inline traits have one shortcoming, namely that interfaces are not specialized. For example: 

```scala
inline trait Foo[T](x: T):
    def foo = x

class Bar extends Foo[Int](42)

def f(b: Foo[Int]) = 37 + b.foo
 
@main def main =
    val x = Bar()
    f(x)
```

In this code the call to `b.foo` will refer to the version of `foo` typed `foo: T` which becomes `foo: Object` during erasure, because we accessed `foo` on
an object of declared type `Foo` (even though `b`'s actual runtime type is `Bar`). This will in turn call a bridge method which means the `foo: Int` method will be called, but unnecessary boxing and unboxing will be added:

```scala
inline trait Foo
    def foo#1(): Object

class Bar extends Foo[Int](42):
    override def foo#2(): Int = 42
    override def foo#3(): Object = Int.box(this.foo())

def f(b: Foo): Int = 37 + Int.unbox(b.foo#1()) // virtual call to foo#1 resolves to bridge method foo#3, which in turn calls actual method foo#2, with boxing. 
```

This problem is addressed via `Specialized` traits; see the accompanying document on those.

## Interaction with other language features

| Language feature                    | Is currently supported inside inline traits? |
|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Methods                             | ✅                                           |
| `val` / `var` Properties            | ✅                                           |
| Non-local private members [3]       | ❌                                           |
| `type`s                             | ✅                                           |
| Inner classes/traits                | ❌ [4]                                       |
| Self types                          | ✅ [5]                                       |
| Inheritance (of inline traits)      | Only allowed by classes, inline traits, traits if the inline trait has no parameters    |
| Opaque types                        | ✅ [6]                                       |

[3] That is, members which are labelled private and accessed from within the class on other instances of the class.
Local private members (members with the same access patterns as the former `private[this]`) are allowed.

[4] Supported with same behaviour as in normal traits. In particular, the following is completely fine, and will be inlined into B.
```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T):
    opaque type Special = T

    def getSpecial: Special = x
    def eatSpecial(y: Special) = "Mmm, that was tasty!" 

class B extends A[Int](100)
```

In contrast, it is not possible to use inlining to "cheat" opaque types, even though it is tempting to try to argue that
the opaque type will be inlined into B and therefore its alias should be visible. This is not allowed because type checking
is performed before inline traits, and this follows the logic that inline traits are an optimisation on top of normal traits,
rather than a semantic change to them.
```scala
inline trait A[T](val x: T):
    opaque type Special = T

class B extends A[Int](100):
    def foo: Special = 10  // error: 10 does not conform to Special
```

[5]
Self types are supported but are not inlined. We argue this is desirable as it ensures that the behaviour of inline traits
with self types mirrors that of ordinary traits with self types. Inlining of self types would effectively remove any restrictions that
these self types seek to impose because the subclass would automatically have a matching self type to that of the parent class. This 
would prevent an error from being thrown, irrespective of whether the subclass implements the desired traits.
Therefore, when using self types on inline traits, the behaviour observed is the following (as in ordinary traits) e.g.:
```scala
trait A[T]:
    this: T1 => 

trait D extends A[Int] // error: self type of D does not conform to that of A
```

[6]
While inline traits may not directly define inner classes, they may contain methods which define classes within their bodies.

## Processing of inline traits in the compiler
Inline traits in user code are inlined in the phase `specializeInlineTraits`. 

We also need to replace members accessed on inline receivers with the corresponding inlined symbols, as mentioned in section 5.2.1 of Timothée's
thesis (see [1] above). We opt however to do this in erasure instead of in a special phase `postSpecializeInlineTraits` because it needs to happen coordinated with erasure of Specialized traits, so that:
 - we see the erased `A$sp$Int` traits and can point at their members
 - we make the replacement before boxing in case `A.foo` is typed with `T` and `B.foo` specializes this to e.g. `Int`. Otherwise we will end up with `Int.unbox(B.foo)` instead of directly `B.foo` which won't typecheck.  

Finally the phase `pruneInlineTraits` is responsible for  converting inline traits into pure interfaces by 
removing their right hand sides. It also handles the mangling in [2]. 

## Internal Note regarding versions of inline traits
This behaviour is the same as that in Timothée's thesis except for the following points:
 - We now allow inline traits to be inlined directly into other inline traits as well as objects and classes.
 - We now do replacement of member accesses to point to the inlined versions throughout the whole code, not just in the bodies of inner classes (section 5.2.1 of the thesis)
 - He allows inline traits to contain inner classes in principle, however in practice they don't work; we ban them.
 - He in practice allows traits to extend inline traits although it doesn't work that well and there was some suggestion it should have been banned; we tighten/specify the rules on this:
     - Trait extends inline trait is only allowed if the inline trait is parameterless
     - Inline trait extends trait is always allowed
 - We modify some of the rules around overrides and conflicting members in order to make the behaviour more consistent with ordinary traits.
    In particular we require `override` in a number of locations where previously conflicts were resolved on the basis of "last extending trait wins".
 - We also fix a number of bugs in the implementation, some of which have a minor effect on the processing and interaction with the rest of the compiler phases, e.g. we apply pruneInlineTraits slightly earlier than in the original implementation to avoid spurious warnings with -Wsafe-init, and we fix flags, and add support for nested inlines.
 - We implement some extra features such as opaque types, super references, and self types.
 - We enforce a number of rules that were previously implicit, with proper errors.
 - We change the handling of private members in pruning of inline traits (we now delete them completely)
 - We change the phase ordering since we conclude that inline trait inlining must happen before pickling to get the benefit of specialization
   across compilation units. Otherwise with the following under separate compilation we will induce boxing:

```scala
// File A.scala
inline trait IT[T]:
    def foo(x: T): T = x

class A extends IT[Int]

// File B.scala
def main = 
    val a = new A()
    val x: Int = a.foo(10) // leads to Int.unbox(a.foo(Int.box(10))) 
```

 This happens because when B.scala is compiled separately against the interface of A (derived from the pickled A.tasty) it will appear that A only supports the generic T interface (erasing to Object and so boxed), whereas it actually also has a specialized Int interface from inline trait inlining. If instead we inline before pickling we solve this problem as the generated interface is present in the pickle. There is precedent for some inlining before pickling in e.g. transparent inlines, and if one uses inline traits one expects code duplication (that's why it is opt-in) and therefore we argue this is not a problem in terms of the increased tasty file size that it leads to.

[***] Why can inline traits not be extended by traits if they take parameters?
Consider:
```scala
inline trait A[T](x: T):
    val y = x
trait B extends A[Int]
class C extends A[Int](10), B
```
After inlining, `B.y` is defined in terms of `B.A$$x` (the inlined copy of the parameter accessor of `x`), but this is undefined as we don't have the parameter value in `B` due to the trait parameter passing rules that insist that `C` passes the parameters directly.

In `C` this is not a problem as we have the parameter value `10`. Even if we try to provide the value by leaving `A$$x` abstract and overriding in `C`
this will not work as `B.A$$x` will still be undefined.

Therefore there is no case in which this could be useful, and it is likely to cause confusion, so we ban it. 
However, there is a reasonable case for `trait extends inline trait` in general, to control the inlining and reduce code duplication so we allow
this pattern if the inline trait has no parameters.

Note that this restriction does not block `inline trait extends trait` or `inline trait extends class`.
