docs/_docs/reference/other-new-features/creator-applications.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Universal Apply Methods"
nightlyOf: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/other-new-features/creator-applications.html
---

Scala case classes generate apply methods, so that values of case classes can be created using simple
function application, without needing to write `new`.

Scala 3 generalizes this scheme to all concrete classes. Example:

```scala
class StringBuilder(s: String):
  def this() = this("")

StringBuilder("abc")  // old: new StringBuilder("abc")
StringBuilder()       // old: new StringBuilder()
```

This works since a companion object with two `apply` methods
is generated together with the class. The object looks like this:

```scala
object StringBuilder:
  inline def apply(s: String): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder(s)
  inline def apply(): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder()
```

The synthetic object `StringBuilder` and its `apply` methods are called _constructor proxies_.
Constructor proxies are generated even for Java classes and classes coming from Scala 2.
The precise rules are as follows:

 1. A constructor proxy companion object `object C` is created for a concrete class `C`,
    provided the class does not have already a companion, and there is also no other value
    or method named `C` defined or inherited in the scope where `C` is defined.

 2. Constructor proxy `apply` methods are generated for a concrete class provided

    - the class has a companion object (which might have been generated in step 1), and
    - that companion object does not already define a member named `apply`.

    Each generated `apply` method forwards to one constructor of the class. It has the
    same type and value parameters as the constructor.

Constructor proxy companions cannot be used as values by themselves. A proxy companion object must
be selected with `apply` (or be applied to arguments, in which case the `apply` is implicitly
inserted).

Constructor proxies are also not allowed to shadow normal definitions. That is,
an ambiguity is reported, if

 - an identifier resolves to a constructor proxy,
 - the same identifier is also defined or imported in some other scope,
 - the other reference can be applied to a (possibly empty) parameter list. That
   is, it refers either to a method or to a value containing an apply method as member.

## Motivation

Leaving out `new` hides an implementation detail and makes code more pleasant to read. Even though
it requires a new rule, it will likely increase the perceived regularity of the language, since case
classes already provide function call creation syntax (and are often defined for this reason alone).

Commit message:

Reference on access of ctor proxy

docs/_docs/reference/other-new-features/creator-applications.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Universal Apply Methods"
nightlyOf: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/other-new-features/creator-applications.html
---

Scala case classes generate apply methods, so that values of case classes can be created using simple
function application, without needing to write `new`.

Scala 3 generalizes this scheme to all concrete classes. Example:

```scala
class StringBuilder(s: String):
  def this() = this("")

StringBuilder("abc")  // old: new StringBuilder("abc")
StringBuilder()       // old: new StringBuilder()
```

This works since a companion object with two `apply` methods
is generated together with the class. The object looks like this:

```scala
object StringBuilder:
  inline def apply(s: String): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder(s)
  inline def apply(): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder()
```

The synthetic object `StringBuilder` and its `apply` methods are called _constructor proxies_.
Constructor proxies are generated even for Java classes and classes coming from Scala 2.
The precise rules are as follows:

 1. A constructor proxy companion object `object C` is created for a concrete class `C`,
    provided the class does not have already a companion, and there is also no other value
    or method named `C` defined or inherited in the scope where `C` is defined.

 2. Constructor proxy `apply` methods are generated for a concrete class provided

    - the class has a companion object (which might have been generated in step 1), and
    - that companion object does not already define a member named `apply`.

    Each generated `apply` method forwards to one constructor of the class.
    It has the same type and value parameters as the constructor,
    as well as the same access restriction as the class.
    If the class is `protected`, then either the companion object must be `protected`
    or the `apply` method will be made `protected`.

Constructor proxy companions cannot be used as values by themselves. A proxy companion object must
be selected with `apply` (or be applied to arguments, in which case the `apply` is implicitly
inserted).

Constructor proxies are also not allowed to shadow normal definitions. That is,
an ambiguity is reported, if

 - an identifier resolves to a constructor proxy,
 - the same identifier is also defined or imported in some other scope,
 - the other reference can be applied to a (possibly empty) parameter list. That
   is, it refers either to a method or to a value containing an apply method as member.

## Motivation

Leaving out `new` hides an implementation detail and makes code more pleasant to read. Even though
it requires a new rule, it will likely increase the perceived regularity of the language, since case
classes already provide function call creation syntax (and are often defined for this reason alone).
