docs/_docs/reference/other-new-features/parameter-untupling.md, before:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Parameter Untupling"
movedTo: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/other-new-features/parameter-untupling.html
---

Say you have a list of pairs

```scala
val xs: List[(Int, Int)]
```

and you want to map `xs` to a list of `Int`s so that each pair of numbers is mapped to
their sum. Previously, the best way to do this was with a pattern-matching decomposition:

```scala
xs map {
  case (x, y) => x + y
}
```

While correct, this is also inconvenient and confusing, since the `case`
suggests that the pattern match could fail. As a shorter and clearer alternative Scala 3 now allows

```scala
xs.map {
  (x, y) => x + y
}
```

or, equivalently:

```scala
xs.map(_ + _)
```
and
```scala
def combine(i: Int, j: Int) = i + j
xs.map(combine)
```

Generally, a function value with `n > 1` parameters is converted to a
pattern-matching closure using `case` if the expected type is a unary
function type of the form `((T_1, ..., T_n)) => U`.

More specifically, the adaptation is applied to the mismatching formal
parameter list. In particular, the adaptation is not a conversion
between function types. That is why the following is not accepted:

```scala
val combiner: (Int, Int) => Int = _ + _
xs.map(combiner)     // Type Mismatch
```

The function value must be explicitly tupled, rather than the parameters untupled:
```scala
xs.map(combiner.tupled)
```

A conversion may be provided in user code:

```scala
import scala.language.implicitConversions
transparent inline implicit def `fallback untupling`(f: (Int, Int) => Int): ((Int, Int)) => Int =
  p => f(p._1, p._2)     // use specialized apply instead of unspecialized `tupled`
xs.map(combiner)
```

Parameter untupling is attempted before conversions are applied, so that a conversion in scope
cannot subvert untupling.

## Reference

For more information see:

* [More details](./parameter-untupling-spec.md)
* [Issue #897](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues/897).

Commit message:

Tighten unary op syntax and untupling language

docs/_docs/reference/other-new-features/parameter-untupling.md, after:

---
layout: doc-page
title: "Parameter Untupling"
movedTo: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/other-new-features/parameter-untupling.html
---

Say you have a list of pairs

```scala
val xs: List[(Int, Int)]
```

and you want to map `xs` to a list of `Int`s so that each pair of numbers is mapped to
their sum. Previously, the best way to do this was with a pattern-matching decomposition:

```scala
xs map {
  case (x, y) => x + y
}
```

While correct, this is also inconvenient and confusing, since the `case`
suggests that the pattern match could fail. As a shorter and clearer alternative Scala 3 now allows

```scala
xs.map {
  (x, y) => x + y
}
```

or, equivalently:

```scala
xs.map(_ + _)
```
and
```scala
def combine(i: Int, j: Int) = i + j
xs.map(combine)
```

Generally, a function value with `n > 1` parameters is wrapped in a
function type of the form `((T_1, ..., T_n)) => U` if that is the expected type.
The tuple parameter is decomposed and its elements are passed directly to the underlying function.

More specifically, the adaptation is applied to the mismatching formal
parameter list. In particular, the adaptation is not a conversion
between function types. That is why the following is not accepted:

```scala
val combiner: (Int, Int) => Int = _ + _
xs.map(combiner)     // Type Mismatch
```

The function value must be explicitly tupled, rather than the parameters untupled:
```scala
xs.map(combiner.tupled)
```

A conversion may be provided in user code:

```scala
import scala.language.implicitConversions
transparent inline implicit def `fallback untupling`(f: (Int, Int) => Int): ((Int, Int)) => Int =
  p => f(p._1, p._2)     // use specialized apply instead of unspecialized `tupled`
xs.map(combiner)
```

Parameter untupling is attempted before conversions are applied, so that a conversion in scope
cannot subvert untupling.

## Reference

For more information see:

* [More details](./parameter-untupling-spec.md)
* [Issue #897](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues/897).
