---
layout: doc-page
title: "Inferable Parameters"
---

Functional programming tends to express most dependencies as simple function parameterization.
This is clean and powerful, but it sometimes leads to functions that take many parameters and
call trees where the same value is passed over and over again in long call chains to many
functions. Inferable parameters can help here since they enable the compiler to synthesize
repetitive arguments instead of the programmer having to write them explicitly.

For example, given the [implied instances](./instance-defs.md) defined previously,
a maximum function that works for any arguments for which an ordering exists can be defined as follows:
```scala
def max[T](x: T, y: T) given (ord: Ord[T]): T =
  if (ord.compare(x, y) < 1) y else x
```
Here, `ord` is an _inferable parameter_. Inferable parameters are introduced with a `given` clause.
The `max` method can be applied as follows:
```scala
max(2, 3) given IntOrd
```
The `given IntOrd` part provides the `IntOrd` instance as an argument for the `ord` parameter. But the point of inferable parameters is that this argument can also be left out (and it usually is). So the following
applications are equally valid:
```scala
max(2, 3)
max(List(1, 2, 3), Nil)
```

## Anonymous Inferable Parameters

In many situations, the name of an inferable parameter of a method need not be
mentioned explicitly at all, since it is only used in synthesized arguments for
other inferable parameters. In that case one can avoid defining a parameter name
and just provide its type. Example:
```scala
def maximum[T](xs: List[T]) given Ord[T]: T =
  xs.reduceLeft(max)
```
`maximum` takes an inferable parameter of type `Ord` only to pass it on as an
inferred argument to `max`. The name of the parameter is left out.

Generally, inferable parameters may be given either as a parameter list `(p_1: T_1, ..., p_n: T_n)`
or as a sequence of types, separated by commas.

## Inferring Complex Arguments

Here are two other methods that have an inferable parameter of type `Ord[T]`:
```scala
def descending[T] given (asc: Ord[T]): Ord[T] = new Ord[T] {
  def compare(x: T, y: T) = asc.compare(y, x)
}

def minimum[T](xs: List[T]) given Ord[T] =
  maximum(xs) given descending
```
The `minimum` method's right hand side passes `descending` as an explicit argument to `maximum(xs)`.
With this setup, the following calls are all well-formed, and they all normalize to the last one:
```scala
minimum(xs)
maximum(xs) given descending
maximum(xs) given (descending given ListOrd)
maximum(xs) given (descending given (ListOrd given IntOrd))
```

## Mixing Inferable And Normal Parameters

Inferable parameters can be freely mixed with normal parameters.
An inferable parameter may be followed by a normal parameter and _vice versa_.
There can be several inferable parameter lists in a definition. Example:
```scala
def f given (u: Universe) (x: u.T) given Context = ...

implied global for Universe { type T = String ... }
implied ctx for Context { ... }
```
Then the following calls are all valid (and normalize to the last one)
```scala
f("abc")
(f given global)("abc")
f("abc") given ctx
(f given global)("abc") given ctx
```

## Querying Implied Instances

A method `the` in `Predef` creates an implied instance of a given type. For example,
the implied instance of `Ord[List[Int]]` is generated by
```scala
the[Ord[List[Int]]]  // reduces to ListOrd given IntOrd
```
The `the` method is simply defined as the (non-widening) identity function over an inferable parameter.
```scala
def the[T] given (x: T): x.type = x
```
Functions like `the` that have only inferable parameters are also called _context queries_.

## Syntax

Here is the new syntax of parameters and arguments seen as a delta from the [standard context free syntax of Scala 3](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/internals/syntax.html).
```
ClsParamClause    ::=  ...
                    |  ‘given’ (‘(’ [ClsParams] ‘)’ | GivenTypes)
DefParamClause    ::=  ...
                    |  GivenParamClause
GivenParamClause  ::=  ‘given’ (‘(’ DefParams ‘)’ | GivenTypes)
GivenTypes        ::=  AnnotType {‘,’ AnnotType}

InfixExpr         ::=  ...
                    |  InfixExpr ‘given’ (InfixExpr | ParArgumentExprs)
```
